---
path: /articles/vim
date: 2019-02-11
title: Vim
subtitle: Instructions not included
peek: |
  Have you ever thought to yourself "I wish my text
  editor were entirely cryptic, didn't let me type without
  entering a secret code, and can't be closed without rebooting?"
  I've got just the thing for you.
tags: [dev-tools]
imported: true
---

```
  1
~
~                             VIM - Vi IMproved
~
~                             version 8.0.1283
~                         by Bram Moolenaar et al.
~                Vim is open source and freely distributable
~
~                       Help poor children in Uganda!
~              type  :help iccf<Enter>       for information
~
~              type  :q<Enter>               to exit
~              type  :help<Enter>  or  <F1>  for on-line help
~              type  :help version8<Enter>   for version info
~
~
~
```

## A Brief History

Way back when [Git](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git) was just a twinkle in the eye of one
[Linus Torvalds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linus_Torvalds), the forerunner of the modern Linux
operating system was in development. One of the most basic components of any modern OS is a text
editor, and for a while [pico](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pico_(text_editor)>) was the de facto
standard. As the open source community is wont to do with most closed source software, an open
source clone named [nano](https://www.nano-editor.org/) soon cropped up. If you've done much of
anything from a command line before, you're likely familiar.

How do we bridge the gap between basic text editing and modern code editors like Sublime Text,
Brackets, and VS Code? There was a lengthy middle ground between the two filled largely by two
more advanced CLI text editors - [VIM](https://www.vim.org/) and [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/). Emacs joined pico amongst the incredible open source software suite released
under the [GNU open source project](https://www.gnu.org/gnu/thegnuproject.en.html), and subsequently
joined tabs in the list of things I like slightly less than the alternative (spaces FTW).

## Vim as an Art Form

VIM is the modern continuation of the [vi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi) editor. It builds on the
existing feature set with additions such as multilanguage support (syntax highlighting and code
folding), advanced undo/redo, split view for editing multiple files, and a rich diff view, amongst
many others.

What good would a development tool be if we as programmers didn't grossly underuse it? There are
quite literally hundreds of incredible features that I would never begin to understand made possible
by vim, not to mention the incredible plugin environment augmented by tools like
[Vundle](https://github.com/VundleVim/Vundle.vim) and [pathogen](https://github.com/tpope/vim-pathogen), to name a couple.

Nearly all modern OS distros either include vim by default or make it available behind a simple
installation. Check your distro for specifics, but it should be available out of the box on Mac
and can be grabbed from your system's package manager something like

```
sudo apt install vim
```

## Here's What You Need To Know

Without further ado, here are the absolute basics you'll want to know to flit around vim whenever
you find yourself with the need to do so. It's a neat party trick, but I believe you'll find it
invaluable to have a bit more control over your text editor when working on a project only
accessible via SSH.

### Configuration

Before we do anything else, let's get started with a few sane defaults. Copy the following into a
file named `.vimrc` inside your user directory (`~` on most systems):

```rc
" enable line numbers
set number

" use 2 spaces for indentation
set tabstop=2 expandtab shiftwidth=2

" enable syntax highlighting
syntax on

" start newlines with the indentation of the previous line
set autoindent
```

Feel free to shop around for any of the umpteen-million (only slightly exaggerating here) settings
available, but I find these to be sufficient to get off the ground.

### Open A File

Let's get started by opening a file. You can open an existing file, or specify a file that doesn't
exist and have it created on your first save:

```
vim file.txt
```

### Reboot To Close

Ok, it's a bit of a meme at this point, but getting out of vim can be a bit non-trivial. Once
you've opened an editor, you'll be in **command mode** by default. You'll notice that if you
try to start typing, nothing much will happen. To switch to \*_insert mode_ to enter text, just
click `i`. While you're in insert mode, click `[esc]` to get back to command mode. While in
command mode, you can enter editor commands by typing `:` and then entering the command.

```
i       INSERT mode    (allows you to type by replacing the current character)
a       INSERT mode    (allows you to type starting after the current character)
[esc]   COMMAND mode   (allows entering of commands prefixed by :)
```

**To close an editor**, type `:wq[Enter]`. In vim-speak, that means _write_ then _quit_.

```
:w  Write out the file to the disk
:q  Quit the editor
:wq Write out the file to disk and then quit
```

If you have unsaved changes, you'll either need to save those changes with a `:w` or **force quit**
the editor with `:q!`:

```
:q! Force quit the editor, discarding any unsaved changes
```

### File & Line Navigation

While arrow keys work just fine (for peasants), we're power users and we want to move our fingers
as little as humanly possible (maybe less). Vim aliases your arrow keys to the right-hand home row,
like so:

```
[h] [j] [k] [l]
[←] [↓] [↑] [→]

j Down
k Up
h Left
l Right
```

In case this feels totally foreign to you (don't worry if it does), here's a cool
[game](https://vim-adventures.com/) to help you learn the ropes. Again, you can just use the arrow
keys like normal, but this is the vim-ish way to get around.

You can use `0` and `$` to jump between the beginning and end of lines:

```
0 jump to the beginning of the current line
$ jump to the end of the current line
```

Similarly, you can use `gg` and `GG` to jump between the beginning and end of the file:

```
gg jump to the beginning of the current file
GG jump to the end of the current file
```

### Deletion

The `d` command is your bread and butter for deleting lines and characters. You can follow it up
with any number of **modifiers** to perform a wide range of deletion (remember to prefix it with
`:`):

```
:dd  delete the current line
:d$  delete from the current cursor position to the end of the line
:d2  delete the 2 characters following the current cursor position
:d5  delete the 5 characters following the current cursor position (etc)
:d2d delete the 2 lines starting at the current line
:d5d delete the 5 lines starting at the current line (etc)
:dw  delete the word that starts at the current cursor position (space delimited)
```

### Visual Selection & Pasting

From command mode, pressing `v` will enter **visual mode**, allowing you to create a selection
using the navigation keys. Once you have a block of text selected, you can press `y` to **yank**
it from the file (think **cut** in normal editor terms).

```
v VISUAL mode (allows for visually selecting text)
y yank text (essentially cut it)
p paste the yanked text at the current cursor position
```

You can also paste the most recently deleted text using `p`.

### Regex Searching

From command mode, pressing `/` will enter a special command prompt for finding text. You can search
by string or by regex (UNIX-flavored, of course).

## Conclusion

There is so much you can do with Vim, but this should hopefully give you a good place to start. If
you want to learn more, head over to the [Vim Tips wiki](http://vim.wikia.com/wiki/Best_Vim_Tips).

Peace out 😎.
